#Listening to Rachmaninoff's Isle of the Dead

This piece, probably one of Rachmaninoff's darkest, is -- as it's called in the
business -- a tone poem or symphonic poem. Tone poems aren't necessary based on
poetry (this piece is about a painting, not a poem), but the idea is rather that
the piece has a subject: a painting, scene, folk story, or an actual poem, that
it tries to evoke or express in musical terms.  Contrast it to something like
Beethoven's fifth symphony, which is just music in and of itself, not referring
to any extra-musical subject.  Rachmaninoff wrote it after seeing a painting of
the same name, by the Swiss painter Böcklin. Funnily, Böcklin did five versions
of the same scene, one of which only survives as a black and white photograph
reproduction, which is the one Rachmaninoff saw. He was so impressed that he
felt impelled to write this piece of music. Afterwards, however, when seeing
another version, in color, he was pretty disappointed, saying he would probably
never have written the piece had he seen the colored version first. Ouch.  The
painting depicts a rowing boat approaching a desolate, craggy island in the
middle of a sea or lake. Aboard the boat are stately figure in white, taken to
be the soul of someone deceased, and a person rowing the boat towards the
island, often likened to Charon from Greek myth, ferrying the souls of the
deceased across the river Styx, into the underworld. So, big surprise, this
piece is going to be about death. Lots of grim, gloomy death.

Before getting into the actual piece, there's a bit of classical music culture
from back in the day you would have to be aware of, before actually fully
understanding what's going on. Namely, the Dies Irae; you've probably heard of
the name at one point or another. It's a medieval hymn from around the 13th
century that is traditionally played during a Requiem mass. It's become a bit of
a Romantic music trope to use the first phrase of the hymn as a formulaic way to
evoke death. Rachmaninoff used it in countless pieces (what can I say, he was
a gloomy guy), and, as you might have guessed, it's going to feature heavily in
this piece. Of course, it wouldn't be any fun if he simply used the tune as is,
so generally it's played around with, transformed, masked and varied. It's going
to increase your enjoyment exponentially if you just take a second to listen to
the hymn, and try to hold that first phrase in your mind's ear (Di-es ir-ae,
di-es il-la), in particular those first four notes will become a really
important motif all throughout the piece. Hum those first four notes a few
times.  I'm serious. Nice and slow: Di-es ir-ae.

I personally really like motivic pieces like this (ie. a motif or theme gets
reused and reworked throughout the entire piece) because it kind of trains your
ears to hear and recognize and actively participate in listening to the music.
It kinda feels like a treasure hunt, feeling kind of satisfying when you
discover a new instance of the same old motif in some disguised way.  Okay, on
to the actual music! The piece starts with a very sombre, subdued theme in the
basses. There is no real melody or harmonic movement. In my mind, we're amid
a misty sea, with nothing to catch our eye just yet. Notice the off-kilter
rhythm in 5/8 that's throwing us off balance, as trying to stand up in a boat
with the waves lapping against the bow arrhythmically. Rachmaninoff's really
trying to mess with us, changing around the strong beats in the 5/8 rhythm as
well (it constantly changes from one-two-three-four-five to
one-two-three-four-five, even to one-two-three-four-five). For the first two-ish
minutes, this "wave-motif" is all we get to hear (and "see").  At about 1:50,
the first hints at the Dies Irae motif start appearing here and there. Pretty
cool how it seems to rise out of the background "waves". It's not just an exact
quotation of our Dies Irae phrase. Instead, the first couple of notes are
vaguely spelled out, just enough to give us a queesy feeling. Maybe we're seeing
a vague outline of an island apear through the mist from time to time.

This keeps going for a couple of minutes. I'll let you make up your own story of
what you feel is going on, with the interplay of the waves, mist and vague
ominous glimpses of death. One particularly striking (and haunting) moment, to
me, occurs around 5:15. This is the first time the piece moves to a major key,
as the strings suddenly soar up into what seems like the start of an uplifting
melody. It's as if, finally seeing the island in full, we are relieved to see
land, overgrown with trees and life, perhaps overjoyed to be saved from the
gloomy misty sea. But, just as soon as we are taken with this positive feeling,
our hopes turn to ashes as the soaring melody transforms into yet another, and
more clear, eery statement of those four notes of the dies irae.  It's as if, as
soon as we see the island, we are overcome with a feeling of despair.

The piece continues along these lines, with a little climax, lots of brass, lots
of bombast, around 8:30-9:00, which will come back from time to time. At around
11:30, the atmosphere changes, and the piece moves to a major key again with
soaring melodies we briefly heard before and more lush harmonies.  But there's
more to it. Not only do we move to a major key for a while, the key changes from
the gloom of A minor to E-flat major, which is a tritone away (I'm looking at
you, Ramses). Basically, this new, hopeful key is musically speaking as far
removed from the original gloomy key of death as one can go, diametrically
opposed. What better key to represent someone thinking back on life and all its
joys, perhaps, in the face of death.  But, again, our reflections on life are
drowned out, and with a deafening blow, we are thrown back into reality around
14:30.

In the following minutes, there's a kind of struggle between the soaring strings
and the ominous brass, coming to a violent battle around 16:00. Then, quiet.
Nothing remains but those ever-present four notes of the dies irae. We slowly
retreat and all we are left with are the lapping of the waves once again. As if
to signify the end of the entire affair and the final victory of death over
life, we are confronted, around 20:30, one last time, with the dies irae -- this
time in full, not just those four notes -- in the cellos, descending into
a slow, downward spiral. 

